# Page 1

1 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
 
 
 
Rafiq Khan and others 
 
Vs. 
 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary and others  
 
 
 
 
 
Date of hearing  
10.06.2026 
 
 
For Petitioner(s): 
Mr. 
Hamza 
Jamshed 
Advocate. 
 
For Respondent(s): 
M/s Sana Ullah AAG and 
Taimur Khan AAG for the 
Federation.  
 
For NADRA: 
Mr. 
Shahid 
Ali 
Khan, 
Director Operation & M/s 
Abdur 
Rauf, 
Muhammad 
Mubarak & Shahid Imran 
Gigyani, Law Officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
****** 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
****** 
 
 
WIQAR AHMAD, J. This judgment is directed 
to dispose of instant writ petition (bearing 
No.6436-P of 2026) and all those writ petitions 
listed in annexure-A, of this judgment.  
2. 
In all these cases petitioners have been 
claiming to be Pakistani citizens by descent and 
that their entry in database of NADRA as 
holders of Afghan Citizen Cards (hereinafter 
referred as ACC) or Proof of Registration Cards 
(hereinafter referred as POR) have been wrong 
(to the extent of reflecting them as Afghan


# Page 2

2 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
citizens), illegal and ineffective upon their 
rights. They have sought declarations for 
declaring them as Pakistani Citizens. It is 
important to be noted that in this and the 
connected cases petitioners have not applied to 
NADRA authorities for issuance of clearance 
certificates, but have approached this Court 
directly, 
without 
obtaining 
said 
remedy 
available to them. It was in this perspective that 
when this case was taken in motion on 
03.06.2026, this Court had asked for the 
following explanations: 
 “It is case of the petitioners that they are 
Pakistani citizens, whereas Afghan Citizen Cards 
were wrongly issued in their names. Learned Law 
Officer for NADRA stated that NADRA has already 
developed a mechanism for entertaining requests 
for 
issuance 
of 
clearance 
certificates 
and 
questioned why the petitioners had not lodged 
such requests at NADRA Registration Centre and 
had instead chosen to file writ petition. Learned 
counsel for petitioners replied that the NADRA 
authorities had not been entertaining the 
requests of the petitioners at all. In such 
circumstances, we direct respondent No. 2 to 
submit a report explaining the policy governing 
such requests, the procedure for entertaining 
same, and the timelines prescribed for issuance 
of clearance certificates. All relevant SOPs, 
policies and procedures shall be explained in 
detail in the report, and copies thereof shall also 
be annexed. Such report shall reach this Court 
within three (03) days. Adjourned to 10.06.2026”. 
 
3. 
In response thereto, NADRA filed its 
comprehensive report. The relevant policy has 
also been annexed with the report. Learned 
counsel for petitioners mainly contended that 
petitioners are not being entertained at the


# Page 3

3 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
NADRA Registration Centres and that is why 
they have been feeling compelled to file 
constitutional petitions before this Court. Mr. 
Shahid Ali Khan, Director Operations, NADRA, 
appeared and assisted the Court in the matter. 
He 
vehemently 
denied 
that 
NADRA 
Registration 
Centres 
have 
been 
denying 
services to consumers. He stated that the 
authority for issuance of Clearance Certificates 
under Section 19 of the Pakistan Citizenship 
Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Citizenship Act”) had been devolved to the 
Registrar General i.e. Chairman NADRA. That 
NADRA has established proper institutional 
mechanism for dealing with all such cases. He 
added that a comprehensive policy has also 
been framed in this regard, which has been 
annexed with the report of NADRA, and that 
sufficient 
human 
resources 
have 
been 
dedicated   for   processing   cases of    ACC  
and  POR card holders. He  further   contended 
that Grievance Redressal Committees have 
also been constituted and that the entire 
machinery has been  working  in   full   gear. 
He submitted that, so far, NADRA  has


# Page 4

4 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
received  26,000 applications, out of which 
2,132 cases have been finally disposed of, while 
6,637 applicants have not turned up to pursue 
the verification process and, therefore, their 
cases remained pending. He further informed 
the Court that, out of the decided cases, 
Clearance Certificates have been issued to 
2,200 applicants, after verification of their 
status as Pakistani nationals (who had wrongly 
been issued ACC or POR cards) whereas 
17,884 cases have been declined as the 
applicants therein could not establish that they 
were Pakistani citizens. Learned Additional 
Attorney General, Assistant Attorney General 
and learned Law Officers for NADRA also 
rendered assistance to the Court in these 
cases. 
4. 
We have heard arguments of learned 
counsel for petitioners, learned Additional 
Attorney General, Director Operation NADRA as 
well as learned Law Officers representing 
NADRA and perused the record.  
5. 
Regarding 
issuance 
of 
Clearance 
Certificates (to those persons in whose names 
ACC or POR cards have been issued but who


# Page 5

5 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
claim to be Pakistani citizens) this Court had 
earlier rendered judgment dated 31.05.2024 in 
the case of “Qasim Khan and others Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary, Islamabad, etc.” (W.P. No. 4283-P 
of 2023), and held that such persons should 
apply to the Federal Government for issuance of 
clearance certificates under section 19 of the 
Citizenship Act. Subsequently, the Federal 
Government devolved its authority under 
Section 19 of the Citizenship Act to the 
Chairman 
NADRA, 
whereafter 
NADRA 
authorities were directed by this Court to 
entertain and process cases of all such 
applicants who claimed to have been Pakistani 
citizens but in whose names ACC or POR cards 
had been issued. The requisite modalities were 
also explained by this Court in its judgment 
dated 02.09.2025 in the case of “Mst. Lal Pari, 
etc. Vs. Federation of Pakistan through 
Federal Secretary, Islamabad, etc.” (W.P. No. 
4827-P of 2025), in the following words: 
“9. 
Regarding modalities adopted by NADRA, 
it was explained by Director General, NADRA that 
NADRA shall process all those cases where 
applicants had earlier approached this Court and 
whose cases had earlier been sent to Ministry of 
Interior Islamabad on the ratio of Qasim Khan 
judgment supra and that necessary intimation


# Page 6

6 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
would also be issued to such applicants. He also 
informed that NADRA have designated their 
Service Delivery Center at Ring road, Peshawar as 
their first center for entertaining all those 
persons, who claim to be Pakistani citizens and 
in whose names ACC or POR Cards had wrongly 
been issued. He added that by looking to number 
of persons and capacity of the Service Delivery 
Center, other centers would also be authorized for 
enabling the authority to cope with influx of such 
persons and NADRA would efficiently deal with all 
such cases at the earliest. While explaining the 
policy given by NADRA for the purpose, the 
worthy Director General, also stated that after 
necessary verification is made by NADRA, once a 
Certificate of Clearance is issued under Section 
19 of Pakistan Citizenship Act 1951 then the 
applicants would be required to collect the 
Certificate and move another application to 
Ministry of SAFRON for obtaining their NOC for 
cancellation of ACC and POR Cards in the 
relevant NADRA database. Here we found that 
this 
may 
result 
into 
much 
inconvenience 
(keeping its legality aside, which may be decided 
in some appropriate case) for those persons, who 
are verified by NADRA to have been Pakistani 
citizens. Compelling them to collect Certificate 
of Clearance from NADRA authorities and then 
applying to Ministry of SAFRON for giving NOC 
for cancellation of ACC and POR cards (as the 
case may be) would be a cumbersome exercise for 
such persons. At that stage they would not be 
having their CNICs and compelling them to 
physical go to Ministry of SAFRON at Islamabad, 
may subject them to much hardship. For avoiding 
such hardship to Pakistani citizens (verified by 
then) it is directed that NADRA shall develop a 
Software for Ministry of SAFRON and once a 
person is verified and he is issued a Certificate 
under Section 19 of Pakistan Citizenship Act 
1951, such certificate shall be transmitted to the 
ministry of SAFRON electronically, who shall 
respond to NADRA within a specified time (not 
more than 15 days) whether they have got an 
objection on cancellation of ACC or POR Cards of 
the individual or not. If they have got no 
objection, 
then 
NADRA 
would 
process 
cancellation of ACC or PORS Cards and issuance 
of CNIC to such Pakistani citizens (as per their 
SOP. This modality should be finalized by 
Secretary, Ministry of SAFRON, Islamabad or his 
representative 
with 
Chairman, 
NADRA 
representative within 15 days. 
 
10. 
In light of what has been discussed above, 
we dispose of this and all the connected writ 
petitions with the observations that all the 
applicants should apply to Service Delivery 
Center at Ring Road, Peshawar or any other 
Center which may be designated by NADRA. Their 
cases 
shall be entertained by NADRA authorities and 
proceeded in accordance with law for issuance of 
a Certificate under Section 19 of Pakistan 
Citizenship Act 1951. Once such certificate is 
issued then the Ministry of SAFRON shall be 
bound to electronically convey their objections or 
no objections to the NADRA authorities within 15


# Page 7

7 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
days of communication of an electronic copy of 
such certificate. The Ministry of SAFRON shall 
also develop a modality for communicating their 
objections 
or 
no 
objections 
to 
NADRA 
electronically, in accordance with our directions 
given above”. 
 
6. 
Despite the fact that the forum having 
been clarified, the mechanism established, and 
no confusion remaining so far as the subject is 
concerned, petitioners have continued to 
approach this Court in large numbers by filing 
writ petitions. In instant cases, petitioners 
have not approached NADRA but have directly 
invoked constitutional jurisdiction of this 
Court, seeking declarations regarding their 
citizenship. Such claims involve disputed 
questions 
of 
facts 
requiring 
factual 
determination, and a competent forum for said 
purpose already exists. In the circumstances, 
resort to the constitutional jurisdiction of this 
Court, and that too as a measure of first 
instance, is not found justified. As regards the 
establishment 
of 
forums, 
procedure 
for 
submission of applications, and subsequent 
process of verification, NADRA has already 
framed and implemented an effective policy. In 
order to make said policy readily available to all 
concerned and to clarify any doubts that may


# Page 8

8 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
still exist in the minds of certain persons, this 
Court deems it appropriate to reproduce 
relevant portions of the policy in this judgment: 
“5. 
Requirements: 
 
5.1.1 
An 
individual 
seeking 
a 
citizenship 
certificate under section 19 of PCA 1951 shall 
appear in person along with an affidavit as 
prescribed by the Pakistan Citizenship Rules, 
1952, affirming the accuracy of the information 
provided therein and all supporting documents at 
any of the designated DAUs of the Authority 
(NADR). 
 
5.1.2 
The affidavit must be duly attested by an 
Oath Commissioner affirming the applicant’s 
statements regarding citizenship and anyone or 
more of the supporting documents as mentioned 
in Schedule IV of this policy.  
 
5.2.1 
Self-presence of the applicant (with or 
without the token slip); OR 
 
5.2.2 
Attendance by any of the blood relatives 
of spouse, as specified within the application, 
presenting the original token slip alongside an 
Authority letter from the applicant bearing the 
applicant’s signature and legible left thumb 
impression. 
 
5.3.1 
An 
applicant 
required 
to 
submit 
documents(s) S/he must do so within the 30 days.  
 
5.3.2 
Non-compliance 
with 
the 
stipulated 
requirements may result in application rejection 
or processing delays.  
 
5.3.3 
All particulars shall be recorded strictly 
in accordance with the document(s) furnished by 
the applicant. 
 
5.3.4 
Guidance may be sought from ARD 
Headquarters, 
regarding 
any 
exceptional 
circumstance(s) at any stage of the case i.e. 
evaluation or interview at the verification Board.  
 
6. 
Procedure of application 
 
6.1.1 
The applicant shall visit in person at a 
NADRA Designated Data Acquisition Unit (DAU) to 
apply for a Citizenship Certificate along with all 
perquisite 
documents/requirements 
ensuring 
that the issuing authority duly verifies all the 
documents. 
 
6.1.2 
The DAU shall issue a quemetic token 
followed by application token and capture the 
applicant's data (including biometric information 
and personal particulars). Digitized form Q, 
having a system generated unique application 
number (Tracking ID) will be printed. The 
applicant will sign the printed form Q and DAU 
will properly scan all supporting documents


# Page 9

9 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
submitted by the applicant including affidavit 
and signed form. 
 
6.1.3 
Subsequent to the document scanning, 
application 
token 
will 
be 
stamped 
as 
an 
acknowledgement 
receipt, 
indicating 
the 
submission and appointment dates for VB and 
shall return all the original documents to the 
applicant and forward the application to the 
Verification Board (VB) for further processing. 
The DAU shall guide the applicant to visit office 
of the verification board on the appointment 
date. 
 
6.1.4  The VB on the scheduled date, shall 
conduct a preliminary interview of the applicant 
in the light of affidavit and provided documents 
and evaluate the eligibility for citizenship. 
 
6.1.5  If the application is found incomplete, it 
shall be returned to the respective DAU, and the 
applicant will be guided on the necessary 
corrections 
or 
submission 
of 
additional 
documents. 
 
6.1.6  The VB once get the documents in the 
manner as required in this SOP shall ensure 
verification 
of 
all 
the 
documents 
through 
verifying 
agencies/ 
relevant 
departments/offices. After receiving verification 
and endorsement from the relevant offices, the 
VB shall conclude the application and render a 
determination within thirty (30) days and send its 
recommendation to the Regional DG being the 
authorized officer. The Authorized Officer shall 
forward his/her final recommendation to the Ops. 
Division ARD Office for review and onward 
process at HQ end. 
 
6.1.7 
ARD office will review overall progress 
and forward the case to the COO with necessary 
input (if any) for the approval of the competent 
Authority. 
 
6.1.8 
The COO, if satisfied with the overall 
working, shall send the case to the registrar 
general or may seek legal advice from Legal Dte., 
(if needed) before, submission to the registrar 
general of Pakistan, for final decision. 
 
6.1.9 
The competent authority may approve 
issuance of Form Q-1 or otherwise reject the 
application, recording the reasons in writing for 
such rejection and/or require further documents 
as the case may be. 
 
6.1.10 Where the application is approved, the 
Form Q-1 will be generated under the digital seal 
and signature of the competent authority and will 
be ready for printing by the originating DAU. In 
the event of rejection, the originating DAU shall 
notify the applicant accordingly through a 
system generated letter.”


# Page 10

10 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
7. When an effective alternate mechanism 
already exists, issues involved in these 
constitutional petitions cannot be resolved 
without a process of factual determination, 
where process of verification can effectively be 
conducted under the policy furnished by 
NADRA, resort to constitutional jurisdiction of 
this Court, and that too as a measure of first 
instance, is not at all justified. This Court, 
while 
rendering 
its 
judgment 
dated 
23.02.2026 in the case titled “Muhammad 
Jamil, etc. Vs. Federation of Pakistan 
through Federal Secretary, Islamabad, etc.” 
(W.P. No. 9815-P of 2025), has already held 
in a somewhat similar situation; 
“12. 
While reverting to the situation in hand, 
we can safely hold that a writ petition filed by a 
foreign citizen for the issuance of a naturalization 
certificate shall only be maintainable where the 
petitioner demonstrates substantial compliance 
with the available statutory machinery by filing a 
formal application under Section 4, supported by 
an official acknowledgement or proof of postage. 
This Court, in exercise of its constitutional 
jurisdiction, must respect the legislative intent 
and the functional integrity of statutory forums; 
therefore, it cannot exercise the executive 
functions by issuing a naturalization certificate 
directly. Such a grant remains the exclusive 
prerogative of the Federal Government, which job 
has 
been 
assigned 
to 
Director 
General, 
Immigration & Passports. The alternate remedy is 
not only efficacious but exclusive to the authority 
of the concerned officer of Federal Government. 
Consequently, this Court shall only intervene 
where the statutory remedy is proven to be 
inefficacious or illusory due to administrative 
inaction, typically evidenced by a failure to 
process the application within sufficient time i.e 
a period of six months. In the absence of such 
proof 
of 
exhaustion 
of 
the 
departmental


# Page 11

11 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
remedies, all the writ petitions were found 
premature, and therefore not maintainable.” 
 
8. 
Petitioners have been approaching this 
Court in instant as well as in all connected 
cases without first resorting to the mechanism 
provided by NADRA for issuance of Clearance 
Certificates and cancellation of ACC/POR 
cards. As such, these writ petitions were found 
to be not maintainable in view of the 
availability of an effective alternate remedy. We 
therefore, dispose of all these writ petitions 
with the observation that petitioners, if so 
advised, may apply to NADRA authorities for 
issuance of Clearance Certificates. All such 
persons who claim to be Pakistani citizens and 
whose ACC/POR cards have been issued 
wrongly in their names, may also approach 
NADRA authorities for said purpose. No officer 
of NADRA shall refuse service to such 
applicants and shall deal with all relevant 
cases in accordance with the policy already 
framed for this purpose (relevant portions 
whereof have been reproduced hereinabove). 
All applicants approaching the designated 
NADRA 
Registration 
Centres 
shall 
be 
entertained and issued proper tokens without


# Page 12

12 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
any exception. They shall be given specific 
dates for submission of requisite documents 
and on submission, proper acknowledgment 
shall be issued in writing. In case any 
deficiency is pointed out, same shall be 
communicated to them along with a further 
date for completion. Where documents are 
found complete, they shall be referred to the 
Special Verification Boards through written 
intimation. 
NADRA 
shall 
also 
devise 
a 
mechanism whereby, on each appearance 
before Special Verification Board, proper 
acknowledgment is to issued to the applicants 
showing their attendance before the Board. The 
cases of all applicants, upon compliance of the 
timelines prescribed by NADRA, shall be 
processed and finally decided within a period 
of four (04) months from the date of 
application/issuance of first token. In case any 
delay is caused on the part of applicant, same 
shall be duly recorded in the NADRA database 
and produced before this Court, if such 
applicant subsequently approaches this Court. 
During pendency of this verification process, 
writ 
petitions 
shall 
not 
ordinarily 
be


# Page 13

13 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
entertained, as same would be premature and 
not maintainable. Only after a reasonable 
period (four months from the date of first 
applications) 
has 
lapsed, 
petitioner 
demonstrates that all requisite documents 
have been submitted, proceedings before the 
Board have been attended, and yet NADRA has 
failed to finalize the matter within four (04) 
months, a petitioner may file writ petition and 
only then same may be entertained. In such 
cases, 
petitioner 
shall 
annex 
proof 
of 
submission of documents and attendance 
before 
the 
Boards. 
In 
the 
absence 
of 
compliance with the aforesaid process, such 
writ petitions shall not be entertained by this 
Court. NADRA authorities shall also modify 
their SOPs in accordance with this judgment. 
Announced 
10.06.2026 
 
 
     
JUDGE    
 
 
 
 
     
JUDGE   
 
(DB)  
 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad J. 
 
 
Hon’ble Ms. Justice Farah Jamshed J. 
*Atif Zafar JSS*


# Page 14

14 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
Annexure-A 
 
Srl. 
No. 
 
Case No. 
Title 
1 
WP 
No.10107-P 
of 
2025 
Mst. 
Kandi 
Gul 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
2 
WP No.9904-P of 2025 
Haji Muhammad Yaseen and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary 
Cabinet, 
Islamabad 
and 
others 
3 
WP 
No.10315-P 
of 
2025 
Zargul and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
4 
WP 
No.10098-P 
of 
2025 
Hamayatullah and others VS National 
DATA Base & Registration Authority 
through its Director General and others 
5 
WP No.9876-P of 2025 
Hussain Muhammad and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
6 
WP No.9901-P of 2025 
Qamru Jan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Interior, 
Islamabad and others 
7 
WP No.9902-P of 2025 
Haji Nazir and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
8 
WP No.9704-P of 2025 
Tila Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
9 
WP No.5190-P of 2026 
Mst. Bas Min and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
10 
WP No.5118-P of 2026 
Mst. Madeeha Shinwari and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
11 
WP No.5734-P of 2026 
Mst. 
Naaz 
Meena 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation 
of 
Pakistan 
through 
Secretary Interior Islamabad and others 
12 
WP No.4090-P of 2026 
Muhammad 
Salim 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
13 
WP No.46-P of 2026 
Ibrahim Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
14 
WP No.48-P of 2026 
Noor 
Muhammad 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
15 
WP No.7-P of 2026 
Hussan Pari and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of 
Interior Islamabad and others 
16 
WP 
No.10538-P 
of 
2025 
Noor Wali and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others


# Page 15

15 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
17 
WP 
No.10398-P 
of 
2025 
Nazir 
Ahmad 
VS 
Director 
General 
NADRA, Ministry of Interior Islamabad 
and others 
18 
WP 
No.10321-P 
of 
2025 
Janbaz Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
19 
WP No.6699-P of 2026 
Hameed Ullah and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
20 
WP No.6734-P of 2026 
Mst. Shafiqa and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
21 
WP No.6723-P of 2026 
Jameel and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of 
Interior, Islamabad and others 
22 
WP No.5230-P of 2026 
Subaidar and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Principal Secretary to 
the Prime Minister Islamabad and others
23 
WP No.6652-P of 2026 
Zakir Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
24 
WP No.6664-P of 2026 
Mst. Shahida VS Federation of Pakistan 
through Federal Secretary Islamabad 
and others 
24-A 
WP No.5805-P of 2026 
Shakeela Bibi and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Ministry of Interior 
Islamabad and others 
25 
WP No.6670-P of 2026 
Arsala Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
26 
WP No.6665-P of 2026 
Khyal Gul and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Principal Secretary to 
the Prime Ministry Islamabad and others
27 
WP No.5169-P of 2026 
Ismat Bibi and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of 
Interior and others  
28 
WP No.5176-P of 2026 
Awal Khan and other VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Principal Secretary to 
the Prime Ministry Islamabad and others
29 
WP No.5177-P of 2026 
Mubarak 
Shah 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation 
of 
Pakistan 
through 
Secretary Interior and others   
30 
WP No.5184-P of 2026 
Ubaid Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
31 
WP No.5186-P of 2026 
Ajab Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
Islamabad and others  
32 
WP No.9855-P of 2025 
Sahib Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
33 
WP No.9854-P of 2025 
Bait Ullah and others Vs Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others


# Page 16

16 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
34 
WP No.9851-P of 2025 
Mst. Brikhna and other Vs Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
35 
WP No.9701-P of 2025 
Haji 
Ajab 
Khan 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
36 
WP No.9850-P of 2025 
Mewa Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
37 
WP No.9677-P of 2025 
Muhammad Nabi VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
38 
WP No.9649-P of 2025 
Saleem Gul alias Sheen Gul and others 
VS Federation of Pakistan through 
Federal Secretary Islamabad and others  
39 
WP No.9532-P of 2025 
Gul Basa and others Vs National Data 
Base & Registration Authority through 
its Director General Peshawar and 
others  
40 
WP No.9518-P of 2025 
Aslam Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
41 
WP No.9485-P of 2025 
Mst. 
Mala 
Khela 
and 
others 
Vs 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
42 
WP No.9845-P of 2025 
Haji Abdul Rehman and others Vs 
National Data Base & Registration 
Authority through its Director General 
Peshawar and others 
43 
WP No.9765-P of 2025 
Muhammad 
Amin 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others  
44 
WP No.9729-P of 2025 
Bakht Yar and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
45 
WP No.9210-P of 2025 
Deryab and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
46 
WP No.9107-P of 2025 
Zia Uddin VS Secretary Ministry of 
Saffron Islamabad and others 
47 
WP No.3225-P of 2026 
Hafiz Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
48 
WP No.5227-P of 2026 
Abdur 
Rehman 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
49 
WP No.2200-P of 2026 
Hayat Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
50 
WP No.5131-P of 2026 
Mst. Taj Bibi and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
51 
WP No.6667-P of 2026 
Sardar Wali and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Ministry of Interior 
Islamabad and others


# Page 17

17 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
52 
WP No.6725-P of 2026 
Mst. Iqbala Bibi VS Ministry of Interior 
through Secretary Interior Government 
of Pakistan and others 
53 
WP No.6728-P of 2026 
Khiyal Muhammad and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
54 
WP No.6669-P of 2026 
Mst. 
Sabira 
Bibi 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
55 
WP No.1070-P of 2026 
Mst. Bibi Niazbina and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
56 
WP No.1376-P of 2026 
Mst. Qadar Meena and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
57 
WP No.3490-P of 2026 
Nasir Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
58 
WP No.4087-P of 2026 
Mst. Katana and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
59 
WP No.6735-P of 2026 
Mst. Gul Naza and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
60 
WP No.6746-P of 2026 
Mst. Musarat Bibi and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
61 
WP No.6748-P of 2026 
Mst. Zarmina VS Federation of Pakistan 
through Federal Secretary Islamabad 
and others   
62 
WP No.6754-P of 2026 
Mst. Bibi Gul and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
63 
WP No.6755-P of 2026 
Said 
Muhammad 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others  
64 
WP No.5044-P of 2026 
Mst. 
Fatima 
Bibi 
and 
other 
VS 
Federation 
of 
Pakistan 
through 
Secretary Interior Islamabad and others  
65 
WP No.5098-P of 2026 
Ata 
Muhammad 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others   
66 
WP No.6627-P of 2026 
Mst. Amina and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
67 
WP No.9580-P of 2025 
Shah Hussain VS Federation of Pakistan 
through Federal Secretary Islamabad 
and others 
68 
WP 
No.10530-P 
of 
2025 
Abdul Qaddar VS Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary Interior Islamabad 
and others   
69 
WP No.221-P of 2026 
Noroz Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others


# Page 18

18 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
70 
WP No.9545-P of 2025 
Hameed Ullah and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
71 
WP No.2048-P of 2026 
Shafiq Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
72 
WP No.2771-P of 2026 
Ashuq and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others   
73 
WP No.5102-P of 2026 
Mst. Fatima Bibi VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others  
74 
WP No.6589-P of 2026 
Aman Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
75 
WP No.6588-P of 2026 
Karim Ullah and others Vs Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
76 
WP No.6598-P of 2026 
Mst. Shah Bibi and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
77 
WP No.9680-P of 2026 
Muhammad 
Noor 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
78 
WP No.6630-P of 2026 
Allah Mohammad Armani and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
79 
WP No.1166-P of 2026 
Mst. Zahida and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of 
Interior Islamabad and others 
80 
WP No.182-P of 2026 
Mst. Bibi Gul and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
81 
WP No.269-P of 2026 
Noor 
Muhammad 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
82 
WP No.9466-P of 2026 
Abdul Khaliq and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan, Ministry of Interior through 
Secretary Interior Islamabad and others
83 
WP No.9991-P of 2025 
Yaghistan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
84 
WP No.9673-P of 2025 
Muhammad Yaqoob and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
85 
WP No.8679-P of 2025 
Wali Jan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
86 
WP No.5103-P of 2026 
Behram Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
Islamabad and others 
87 
WP No.5092-P of 2026 
Mst. 
Darkho 
Bibi 
and 
other 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others


# Page 19

19 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
88 
WP No.5096-P of 2026 
Abdul Wasay and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
89 
WP No.5086-P of 2026 
Mst. Zarwari and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
90 
WP No.5053-P of 2026 
Mst. Basria Bibi VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
91 
WP No.5084-P of 2026 
Shams 
Ur 
Rehman 
VS 
Chairman 
NADRA Islamabad and others  
92 
WP No.6540-P of 2026 
Safi Ullah and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
93 
WP No.6542-P of 2026 
Misri Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
94 
WP No.6549-P of 2026 
Ihsan Ullah and others VS NADRA 
through its Chairman and others  
95 
WP No.6550-P of 2026 
Mst. Shareefa Bibi VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
96 
WP No.6551-P of 2026 
Mst. Asia Bibi and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Principal Secretary 
to the Prime Minister, Islamabad and 
others 
97 
WP No.6552-P of 2026 
Mst. Bibi Lala and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
Islamabad and others 
98 
WP No.6555-P of 2026 
Mst. Amina Bibi Alias Azad Mina Bibi 
and others VS Federation of Pakistan 
through Ministry of Interior through its 
Secretary and others 
99 
WP No.5024-P of 2026 
Khalid Khan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
100 
WP No.5032-P of 2026 
Ahmad Abbas and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
101 
WP No.6537-P of 2026 
Mst. Saz Meena and others VS NADRA 
through its Chairman and others  
102 
WP No.6672-P of 2026 
Taslima 
Mudir 
and 
others 
VS 
Government 
of 
Pakistan 
through 
Ministry of Interior Islamabad and 
others  
103 
WP No.5012-P of 2026 
Mst. Sumbal Bibi and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
104 
WP No.6650-P of 2026 
Mst. Zubaida and others VS Chairman 
National 
Database 
& 
Registration 
Authority Islamabad and others 
105 
WP No.6547-P of 2026 
Behram Jan and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others


# Page 20

20 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
106 
WP No.8683-P of 2025 
Shafi 
Muhammad 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
107 
WP No.8214-P of 2025 
Nawab Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
108 
WP No.5020-P of 2026 
Mst. Hafsa Raheem Dad VS National 
Database and Registration Authority 
through its Chairman and others  
109 
WP No.6688-P of 2025 
Mst. Ambreen Bibi and other VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
110 
WP No.4992-P of 2026 
Aqil Din and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
111 
WP No.3348-P of 2026 
Samar Gul and others VS National 
Database 
& 
Registration 
Authority 
through its Director General Peshawar 
and others 
112 
WP No.5130-P of 2026 
Noor Agha and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
113 
WP No.6655-P of 2026 
Ahmad Ullah and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
Islamabad and others 
114 
WP No.51-P of 2026 
Awal Gul and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
115 
WP No.5639-P of 2026 
Mst. Maryam Bibi and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
116 
WP No.5095-P of 2026 
Muhammad Anwar and others VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
117 
WP No.3754-P of 2026 
Waris and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
118 
WP No.4984-P of 2026 
Mst. Husna and other VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
119 
WP No.6559-P of 2026 
Muhammad Rehman Khan and others 
VS Federation of Pakistan through 
Federal Secretary Islamabad and others 
120 
WP No.6563-P of 2026 
Mst. Shakeela Bibi Vs Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
121 
WP No.6532-P of 2026 
Hazrat Muhammad and others VS 
National 
Database 
& 
Registration 
Authority through its Director General 
Peshawar and others 
122 
WP No.6461-P of 2026 
Dawlat Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
123 
WP No.6464-P of 2026 
Hammad and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others


# Page 21

21 
 
 
W.P. No.6436-P/2026 
124 
WP No.6473-P of 2026 
Zar Gulab and others VS Federation of 
Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
125 
WP No.6458-P of 2026 
Taj Ul Malook and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
Islamabad and others 
126 
WP No.5249-P of 2026 
Mst. 
Bakht 
Bibi 
and 
others 
VS 
Federation of Pakistan through Federal 
Secretary Islamabad and others 
127 
WP No.6445-P of 2026 
Sultan Khan and others VS Federation 
of Pakistan through Federal Secretary 
Islamabad and others 
 
 
 
     
JUDGE    
 
 
 
     
JUDGE   
  
(DB)  
 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad J. 
 
 
Hon’ble Ms. Justice Farah Jamshed J. 
*Atif Zafar JSS*